# ELM Basic Programming

## Overview

**Elm** is functional domain specific language created for developing Complex Web User Interfaces. As domain language is designed primarily for developing web applications only; however, its use will eventually increase to other User Inteface types.

*Elm* language syntax was heavily inspired by *Haskell* and its main compiler is still written in this programming language. As you probably know, Haskell is a pure functional language.

Since Elm is a pure functional language, the functions need to be stateless. This means these functions are not able to hold a state. They must return the same result for the same input. Basically, pure functions merely map an input to some output.

## General Setup

### Perform ELM Installation

### Tools

#### Elm Repl (Command Line Tool)

#### Run Elm Development Server

```shell
elm reactor --port 3000
```

#### Elm Make

**elm make** is a command line tool that does the compilation to a development version or to a production version. This command line tool was added on the 0.19 version and it replaces the **elm-make** command line tool.

```shell
elm make src/helloWorld01.elm
```

It is possible to generate a specific file to contain the functionality.

```shell
elm make src/helloWorld01.elm --output=helloWorld01.js
```

elm make --optimize

elm make --optimize + uglifyjs

#### Elm Init

The **elm** init is an utility for creating an *Elm* project. This utility creates an **elm.json** file. This file describes the project. It list all the packages including core ones such as **elm/core** and **elm/html**.

```bash
elm init
```

#### Create ELM App

The **create-elm-app** which is very similar to create-react-app

#### Add Javascript package with Yarn file

```shell
yarn init -y
```

### Syntax

* *Variables*
* *Types and Data Types*

#### Variables

The *variables* at ELM do not use any specific reserved word

#### Types or Data Types

Types can be annotated at Elm,  specified at the variable declaration or they can be infered.

A type indicate a declaration of the kind of data encapsulated in a variable.

While at other programming languages, the type of a varible determines the amount of memory dedicated for storing the variable. At ELm, it indicates the kind of data stored in that variable

##### Messages

*Messages* are *types*

#### Functions

At Elm functions are first-class.
-- functioname: return -> (arg1 type -> arg2 type -> arg3 type)
Functions can be returned from other functions.
Functions can be passed as arguments into other functions.

#### Models

##### Collections

##### Tuples

* Tuples are limited to a max of 3 elements

##### Records

* *Records* have more than 3 elements

##### Dictionaries

### Examples

#### Hello World

This simple example prints a *HTML* text to the string

```elm
module HelloWorld exposing (..)

import Html exposing (text)

main =
  text "Hello, World!"
```

The first line is the module declaration line. It defines a **module**. This module is named **Main**. This **Main module** expose everything  **(..)**. This means it exposes all the functions available at this module.

Selecting which *functions* are exposed, we manage which *functions* are accessible from other files. This is useful when we work with multiple files. We can choose which functions are *public* and which functions are *private*. *public functions* are exposed to other *modules*.

```elm
module Main exposing (..)
```

However, this is not a recommended practice, since some functions are declared to be private. It is possible to limit the functions.

### Add Function

```javascript
/**
*
**/
function add(a,b){
    return a+b;
}
```

```elm
add a b = a + b
```

In EML can also use Type Annotation such as the following example:

```javascript
// Anonymous function
var factorial = function(n) {
    // total Declaration
var total = 1;
for (var i=1; i<=n; i++){
total = total * i;
}
return total;
}
```

```elm

```

### References

* [A ELM Single Page Example elm-spa-example](https://github.com/rtfeldman/elm-spa-example)
* [Single-Page Web Apps in Elm](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/single-page-web-apps-elm-part-one-getting-started-new-kevin-greene/)
