# The Elm Architecture

## The Elm Architecture (TEA)

The ELm Architecture is not based in *Web components* such as React Components. There is not need for creating separate *Web Components* each with different specific states.

The Elm Architecture or the logic of every program is structured in four sections or four cleanly separated parts.

* **model** The *Elm* model defines the shaper of its the application data. It is where we declare the data types and set its initial values (init). The *model* could have several different types -strings, integers, list, records, or even other type aliases defined in the *model* section.
* **view**
* **update** The elm updaters have the same purpose as reducers in Redux.
* **subscriptions**

### Elm Architecture Elements

#### Model

The modules are built around a specific **type** and a model. Each module could have these sections or only some of them. The *module's* **model** have multiple view for managing a model based on the different messages of the module.

A **model** is similar to the *store = createStore(component)*. The model are created with a *type alias* (style recommends to use a first capital letter for namming the type alias)

```elm
type alias Model = { ... }
```

A model could be something simple as a *counter*. This represented by type *Int*

```elm
-- MODEL

type alias Model = Int
```

An example of a model could be a *Person*.

```elm
-- MODEL
type alias Person =
  {
    name: String,
    age: Int
  }
```

Another example of a model is the following

#### View

The **view** acts as *render* function which render the component. In this case, it is not necessary to encapsulate everything in component.

```elm
-- VIEW

view : Model -> Html
view =
...
```

#### Update

In Redux, the update are triggered through **messages** which are *dispatched* by the *store*. Similarly at *Elm*, we declare the actions and the messages to exchange in those actions.

```javascript
store.dispatch({ type: 'INCREMENT' })}
```

```elm
-- UPDATE

type Action = Action 1 | ...

update : Action -> Model -> Model
update action model =
  case action of
    Action 1 -> ...
    ...
```

At Redux, the reducers works in similar way reacting based on the **object** *action*. This object has a *property* name *type*. That property could take different value. It could have *'Increment'* value which modifies the *state*. The *state* acts as **model**. For example, if we declare a model *counter* in Redux. We generate a *INCREMENT* and *DECREMENT* actions for updating its *state*

```javascript
export default (state = 0, action) => {
  switch (action.type) {
    case 'INCREMENT':
      return state + 1
    case 'DECREMENT':
      return state - 1
    default:
      return state
  }
}
```

At Elm, the *update* function is quite similar. The *counter* **model** has been defined. There is a **type** *action* which have different cases for *increment* and *decrement* the *counter* **model**.

```elm
-- UPDATE
-- type action
type Action = Increment | Decrement

update : Action -> Model -> Model
update action model =
  case action of
    Increment ->
      model + 1

    Decrement ->
      model - 1
```

This same logic could be apply to other **models** such as *Person*, an **Account**, a

```elm
-- Actions
type Msg =
  IncrementAge
  | DoNothing


-- Update
update : Msg -> Person -> Person
update msg person =
  case msg of
    IncrementAge -> { person | age = (person.age + 1) }
    DoNothing -> person
```